# Advanced Features of Terraform: Workspaces, Provisioners, and Data Sources

> This guide delves into few of its more advanced features: `workspaces`, `provisioners` and `data sources`. Also, you will get briefly acquainted with `HCP terraform`, formerly **Terraform Cloud**.

## 🔰 Terraform Workspaces

Imagine you're an artist with a single canvas, but you wish to paint different scenes without mixing them up. **Terraform workspaces** serve a similar purpose in managing distinct instances of your infrastructure with ease, akin to having multiple canvases.

>`Workspaces` in Terraform allow you to manage different states of your infrastructure, **similar to working with different branches in `Git`**. This is crucial for maintaining consistency across various environments like `development`, `staging`, and `production`.

### Understanding Workspaces

A Terraform workspace is a named container that holds a separate state for your infrastructure. By default, Terraform operates in a workspace named `default`. 
>However, you can create multiple workspaces to manage different environments (e.g., `development`, `staging`, `production`) without the risk of interfering with each other.


### Creating and Managing Workspaces

To start using `workspaces`, you first need to understand how to create and manage them. Here's a step-by-step guide:
#### Creating a New Workspace
```bash
terraform workspace new dev
```

>This command creates a new workspace named `dev`. **Terraform will automatically switch to this workspace upon creation**.

#### Listing Workspaces
```bash
terraform workspace list
```
>This will list all `workspaces`, with the current workspace highlighted.

#### Switching Workspaces
```bash
terraform workspace select dev
```
>Switch to the `dev` workspace with this command.

### Using Workspaces in Configuration

To leverage the power of `workspaces` within your Terraform configurations, you can use the `${terraform.workspace}` interpolation. This allows for dynamic changes based on the current workspace. 

For example:
```bash
resource "aws_s3_bucket" "example" {
  bucket = "my-app-${terraform.workspace}"
  acl    = "private"
}
```

>In the `dev workspace`, this configuration will create an S3 bucket named `my-app-dev`.


## 🔩 Terraform Provisioners

>After **Terraform** creates your resources, you might want to perform additional tasks like running a *script or configuring a service*. `Provisioners` in Terraform are your tools for these **post-deployment activities.**

### Understanding Provisioners

Think of provisioners as the crew that comes in after a building is constructed to paint the walls and install the carpets. They're the final touch that makes the space usable.
#### Types of Provisioners

-   `Local-exec`: Executes a command on the machine running Terraform.
-   `Remote-exec`: Executes a command on the newly created resource.

#### Using the Local-exec Provisioner

The `local-exec` provisioner can be used to run scripts on your local machine after a resource is created. For example, to send a notification:
```bash
resource "aws_instance" "example" {
  # ...

  provisioner "local-exec" {
    command = "echo 'New instance created' > instance_creation.txt"
  }
}
```

#### Using the Remote-exec Provisioner

The `remote-exec` provisioner allows you to run commands on a remote resource after it's been created. **This requires connection details:**
```bash
resource "aws_instance" "example" {
  # ...

  provisioner "remote-exec" {
    inline = [
      "sudo apt-get update",
      "sudo apt-get install -y nginx",
    ]

    connection {
      type        = "ssh"
      user        = "ubuntu"
      private_key = file("~/.ssh/id_rsa")
      host        = self.public_ip
    }
  }
}
```

#### Best Practices for Using Provisioners

-   **Idempotency:** Ensure your scripts can run multiple times without causing errors or unintended consequences.
-   **Minimal Use:** Provisioners should be a last resort. Prefer using other Terraform resources or data sources if possible.

## 🌟 Data Sources

>**Data sources** are used to retrieve information about existing resources or external systems that are not managed by Terraform. They allow you to query and reference this data within your Terraform configurations.

For example, if you need to use the latest Amazon Linux AMI for your EC2 instances but don't manage the AMI directly, you can use a data source to fetch this information. Here's a concise example:


```bash
data "aws_ami" "latest_amazon_linux" {
  owners      = ["amazon"]
  most_recent = true
  filters {
    name   = "name"
    values = ["amzn2-ami-hvm-*-x86_64-gp2"]
  }
}

resource "aws_instance" "example" {
  ami           = data.aws_ami.latest_amazon_linux.id
  instance_type = "t2.micro"
}
```

## ⛅ HCP Terraform

>HashiCorp Cloud Platform (HCP) Terraform is a service provided by HashiCorp that simplifies the management of Terraform infrastructure by offering a managed Terraform Cloud environment. It allows you to securely and efficiently run Terraform workflows without needing to manage the infrastructure yourself.

### Key Features:

-   **Managed Infrastructure**: HCP Terraform handles the underlying infrastructure for running Terraform, including scaling and high availability.
-   **Secure Storage**: Provides secure storage for state files and sensitive data, reducing the risk of data loss or exposure.
-   **Integrated Secrets Management**: Integrates with HashiCorp Vault for managing secrets and sensitive data.
-   **Collaboration**: Facilitates team collaboration with features like version control, access management, and remote state management.
